# Methods  {.page_break_before}

## Whole Genome Sequencing

All library preparation and sequencing was performed at the Wellcome Sanger Institute.

Paired-end multiplex libraries were prepared using the manufacturer's protocol, with the exception that genomic DNA was fragmented using Covaris Adaptive Focused Acoustics rather than nebulization.

Multiplexes comprised 12 tagged individual mosquitoes and three lanes of sequencing were generated for each multiplex to even out variations in yield between sequencing runs.

Cluster generation and sequencing were undertaken according to the manufacturer's protocol for paired-end sequence reads with insert size in the range 100-200 bp.

4,693 individual mosquitoes were sequenced in total, of which 3,130 were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform and 1,563 were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq X platform.

All individuals were sequenced to a target coverage of 30X.

HiSeq 2000 sequencing runs generated 100 bp paired-end reads, while HiSeq X sequencing runs generated 150 bp paired-end reads.

## Alignment and SNP calling

Reads were aligned to the AgamP4 reference genome using `bwa` version 0.7.15.

Indel realignment was performed using GATK version 3.7-0 `RealignerTargetCreator` and `IndelRealigner`.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms were called using GATK version 3.7-0 `UnifiedGenotyper`.

Genotypes were called for each sample independently, in genotyping mode, given all possible alleles at all genomic sites where the reference base was not `N`.

Coverage was capped at 250X by random down-sampling.

Complete specifications of the __[alignment](https://github.com/malariagen/pipelines/blob/v0.0.4/docs/specs/short-read-alignment-vector.md)__ and __[genotyping](https://github.com/malariagen/pipelines/blob/v0.0.4/docs/specs/snp-genotyping-vector.md)__ pipelines are available from the __[malariagen/pipelines](https://github.com/malariagen/pipelines)__ GitHub repository.

Open source WDL implementations of the __[alignment](https://github.com/malariagen/pipelines/tree/v0.0.4/pipelines/short-read-alignment-vector)__ and __[genotyping](https://github.com/malariagen/pipelines/tree/v0.0.4/pipelines/SNP-genotyping-vector) pipelines are also available from GitHub.

Following successful completion of these pipelines, samples entered the sample quality control (QC) process.
